---
sidebar_position: 2
title: What is Dart
---



Dart is a modern, class-based, object-oriented programming language that is designed to be easy to learn and use. 
It was first introduced by Google in 2011 as a language for web development, but has since evolved into a general-purpose language that can be used for a wide range of applications, including web and mobile app development, server-side development, and command-line tools.

<!-- One of the key features of Dart is its speed and scalability. Dart uses a just-in-time (JIT) compiler to optimize code execution, which allows it to perform well even on complex applications. Additionally, Dart also supports ahead-of-time (AOT) compilation, which can further improve performance and reduce startup times. -->

<!-- Dart also supports asynchronous programming, which allows developers to write code that can perform multiple tasks simultaneously without blocking the execution of other code. This is particularly useful for web and mobile app development, where applications often need to perform multiple tasks at the same time, such as handling user input and updating the user interface. -->
<!-- 
Dart also features a modern and easy-to-learn syntax, with features such as type inference, optional types, and a concise syntax for defining functions and classes. This makes it a popular choice for both beginner and experienced developers.

Finally, Dart has a large and growing community of developers and contributors who provide support, tutorials, and open-source packages. The most popular framework built with Dart is Flutter, which is a mobile app development framework that allows developers to create high-quality, visually appealing, and performant apps for both Android and iOS platforms. -->

## **History Of Dart**

Dart was first introduced by Google in October 2011 as a language for web development, with the goal of creating a scalable and efficient language that could be used for both client-side and server-side development. It was designed as a replacement for JavaScript, which was seen as inadequate for large-scale web applications.

### November 2013 (v1.0)
- Dart-to-JavaScript Compiler
- Integrated Development Environment ( Dart Editor )

### 2014
- Google Anounced to use Dart for its Internal web development project
- Including AdWords, Google Fiber, and Google Express

### 2015
- Google Anounced the release of AngularDart
- It Was Desined to build large-scale web applications

### December 2015 (v1.10)
- Included Support For Ahead-of-time (AOT) Compilation
- This allows to be compiled to machine code

### May 2017
- Google Anounced the release of Flutter

Since its release, Dart has continued to evolve and gain popularity among developers. Today, it is used by companies such as Google, Wrike, and Workiva for a wide range of applications, including web and mobile app development, server-side development, and command-line tools.

## Key Features

### Open Source

Dart is an open-source programming language, which means it is freely available. It is developed by Google, approved by the **ECMA standard**, and comes with a BSD license.
### Platform Independent

Dart supports all primary operating systems such as Windows, Linux, Macintosh, etc. The Dart has its own Virtual Machine which known as **Dart VM**, that allows us to run the Dart code in every operating system.
### Object Oriented

Dart is an object-oriented programming language and supports all oops concepts such as **classes, inheritance, interfaces and optional typing features**. It also supports advance concepts like mixin, abstract, classes, reified generic, and robust type system.
### Concurrency

Dart is an **asynchronous programming language**, which means it supports multithreading using **Isolates**. The isolates are the independent entities that are related to threads but don't share memory and establish the communication between the processes by the message passing. The message should be serialized to make effective communication. The serialization of the message is done by using a snapshot that is generated by the given object and then transmits to another isolate for desterilizing.
### Extensive Libraries

Dart consists of many useful inbuilt libraries including SDK (Software Development Kit), core, math, async, math, convert, html, IO, etc. It also provides the facility to organize the Dart code into libraries with proper namespacing. It can reuse by the import statement.

### Easy to learn

As we discussed in the previous section, learning the Dart is not the Hercules task as we know that Dart's syntax is similar to Java, C#, JavaScript, kotlin, etc. if you know any of these languages then you can learn easily the Dart.

### Flexible Compilation

Dart provides the flexibility to compile the code and fast as well. It supports two types of compilation processes, **AOT (Ahead of Time)** and **JIT (Just-in-Time)**. The Dart code is transmitted in the other language that can run in the modern web-brewers.

### Type Safe

The Dart is the **type safe language**, which means it uses both static type checking and runtime checks to confirm that a variable's value always matches the variable's static type, sometimes it known as the sound typing.

Although types are required, type annotations are optional because of type interference. This makes it code more readable. The other advantage to being type-safe language is, when we change the part of code, the system warns us about that modification that we have modified earlier.

### Browse Support

The Dart supports all modern web-browser. It comes with the **dart2js compiler** that converts the Dart code into optimized JavaScript code that is suitable for all type of web-browser.

## The Future of Dart

The future of Dart looks bright, as the language continues to gain popularity and adoption among developers. Here are some of the reasons why:

1. **Flutter:** Dart is the primary programming language used for Flutter, a mobile app development framework created by Google. Flutter has gained a lot of popularity in recent years, thanks to its ease of use, flexibility, and ability to create high-performance apps for both iOS and Android platforms using a single codebase.

2. **Web development:** Dart has been used for web development for several years, and it continues to evolve and improve. In recent years, Dart has added support for web components, making it easier to build reusable and modular web applications.

3. **Server-side development:** Dart can also be used for server-side development, with frameworks like Aqueduct and Angel providing an easy and efficient way to build web servers and APIs.

4. **Google support:** Dart is backed by Google, which continues to invest in the language and its ecosystem. Google uses Dart for several of its internal projects, including AdWords and Google Fiber, and it's likely that Dart will continue to play an important role in Google's development efforts.

5. **Growing community:** The Dart community is growing rapidly, with more and more developers adopting the language and contributing to its development. This has resulted in a rich ecosystem of libraries, tools, and resources, making it easier for developers to work with Dart.

Overall, the future of Dart looks promising, as the language continues to evolve and gain traction in various areas of development.
